---
date: 2019-08-25
description: A big potato
tags:
  - post
title: On Being Better
---

## On Being Better

<small class="disclaimer">NB: This was originally posted a dog's age ago on Medium. But since Medium is no bueno, it's been removed and has lived on some version of my personal site since then.</small>

For most of my life, I’ve managed to just about be a decent person. There was a period, longer than I’d like to admit, when I was a pretty bad person. I didn’t do anything illegal, I didn’t really hurt anyone seriously, but I was rude. I was unkind and selfish, generally misanthropic. I was a lot of things that I’m glad I’m not anymore. I know I’m a better person than I used to be. I’m kind of sure I’m a good person. But why not try to be better? There’s a version of me that’s better than I am. Why not be that person?

In 2015 I received a PhD in philosophy, specializing in ethical theory. During the nine or ten years I was in graduate school, I spent a lot of time thinking about the way I had been living my life. I realized what mattered to me, what was important – the sorts of things I could live happily with and the sorts of things that made me feel guilt, shame, regret, remorse, and other, similar self-directed attitudes. For instance, I realized that I cared a lot more about the suffering, both human and non-human, that goes on in the world than I had thought. I realized that the way I had been living my life was inconsistent with the way I felt about the amount of suffering in the world. I was doing too little to prevent it and too much that contributed to or supported it. Around 2006, I became a lacto-ovo vegetarian – which means that I didn’t eat meat, but I still ate dairy and eggs and I still purchased products that contained non-human animal byproducts. But after a couple of years, I realized that this was also inconsistent. After learning, for example, that the dairy products I was consuming required, what basically amounts to torture, for a lot of cows, I couldn’t justify eating cheese to myself anymore. I learned that in these massive dairy production facilities, beyond the fact that cows are quite literally tortured, the environment is terribly harmed – pollution around these facilities is astounding. So one day, I changed. I made the decision to live a vegan lifestyle. It came down to this: If I wouldn’t torture a cow myself, if I wouldn’t force a cow to endure the suffering associated with milk and cheese production myself (for example, forced impregnation, removal of calves before they’re ready to be removed – which causes cows to become severely depressed – an actual thing that cows can experience!), then how can I justify paying someone else to do this for me? I couldn’t.

Again, I don’t think I’m a great person. There are times when I’m not even sure I’m a good person. But I’m trying to be a better person. Every. Single. Day. Sometimes I fail. Sometimes I make mistakes. Sometimes my old tendencies show themselves again and I’m unnecessarily rude, or I betray someone’s trust, for instance, for the sake of a joke. But I feel regret when that happens. I feel remorse. And I feel deep shame. And so I try to do better.

Even if you’re absolutely content with who you are – the kind of person you are, the kinds of things you like, the kinds of things you do – it seems pretty unreasonable to think that you couldn’t be at least a little bit better. Maybe you’re a little bit flakey – you sometimes say you’ll do things that you never actually do. Maybe you’re, sometimes, a little cold or callous – you’re a little rude to a cashier or you cut someone off on the road, perhaps. Maybe you’re fond of inappropriate jokes, or use phrases and words that betray some degree of prejudice, terms that are misogynistic, racist, (dis)ableist, homophobic, speciesist, etc. The point is, no matter who you are, unless you never, ever struggle with a decision about what to do, unless you never, ever set a foot wrong, there’s a version of you that’s better than the version you currently are. Why not be that person?

There are times when it’s hard. There are times when it’s frustrating, especially when you see other people, people you care about, doing things that you think are genuinely morally wrong. But that doesn’t mean you should be any less vigilant. And yes, you should speak up when you see someone else doing something that’s morally wrong or problematic. If you care about the people in your life, you should want the best for them, you should want them to be the best version of themselves that they can be. You should think critically about what that means, and you should follow through.

Don’t settle for being just a decent person. Be a better person. And don’t settle for having just decent people in your life. Seek out good people. Help the people you love to be better people. It might sound really cheesy, but it’s just true that if no one cares about being better than they are, then the world won’t get any better. Our problems, which have survived, and will continue to survive indefinitely into the future, will never get any less problematic unless we all, together, do what we can to make the world a better place to live in.

What does it mean to ‘do better?’ What does that look like? Is it just following your conscience – doing what you already think is right? I’m sorry to say that merely following your conscience – doing what you already think is right – is probably not enough. Unless you think that the world, of which you are a product, allowed you to grow into a perfectly good person, then your conscience is probably wrong, at least with regard to a few things. That’s OK! it’s OK to be wrong, it’s OK to make mistakes.

But it’s not OK to be satisfied with that. When you make a mistake, when you lash out or hurt someone, it’s on you to make it better. It’s on you to make sure you don’t make the same mistakes over and over again. And if you are making the same mistakes over and over again, you should take a step back and look at what caused you to do those things. Why did you hurt that person? Why didn’t you care enough to have done better? The process of becoming a better person is a process of critical self-reflection. You should think long and hard about the things that you care about and try to figure out why you care about those things. What is it about your friends that makes you love them? And if you love them, why do you hurt them? What is it about the cow that makes you not care about it? Why is it OK to hurt the cow just for a few moments pleasure? What is it about foreigners that makes you wary of them? Why don’t you care enough to do more to help them?

I suspect a large part of being a good person has to do with being consistent. For example, lots of people are anti-abortion but pro-capital punishment. Given the fact that the criminal justice system is far from perfect, a lot of people have been executed who were innocent of the crimes they were charged with. So if someone is anti-abortion on the grounds that the fetus is innocent, they should also be against capital punishment in cases when the person facing execution is innocent. But since sometimes it’s very hard to know whether someone charged with a crime is guilty of that crime, if we care about innocence, we should, at minimum, be more hesitant to permit capital punishment.

Or take a slightly more philosophical (i.e. what some might call ‘unrealistic) example. Suppose one year from today, an alien species makes contact with Earth. Suppose the alien species is vastly more intelligent than humans. Suppose the distance between their cognitive complexity and ours is similar to the distance between our cognitive complexity and that of the cow’s or pig’s. Now suppose that they want to eat us – we’re as delicious to them as the non-human animals you eat are to you. Would we have a justified complaint against the aliens? Could we justifiably say to them, ‘You shouldn’t eat us. We feel pain. We experience our lives. We care about living. We don’t want to be your food!’? If you think such a complaint would be justified, why wouldn’t a similar complaint from, or on behalf of, the non-human animals you eat be similarly justified? What reasons could you offer? You might say, ‘Well, pigs are delicious.’ But the aliens think that we’re delicious too, so that can’t be the right reason. You might instead say, ‘Well, we’re cognitively complex and pigs aren’t.’ But, in comparison to these imagined aliens, we are not more cognitively complex than pigs are in comparison with us. So that can’t be the right reason. But then what is the reason? What can justify your non-human animal consumption that wouldn’t also justify the aliens’ human consumption? I’m not sure that there’s a good answer to this question that isn’t just: there is no such justification.

Now, I’ve gone on and on about our dietary habits. And maybe you think that’s silly. Maybe you think it’s just a non-starter. Well, I disagree, but that’s OK because there are lots of other issues that, if we thought hard, really hard about, we’d probably come to agreement on. Again, I don’t think I’m perfect. I’m sure there are things that I do that I shouldn’t be doing. But the difference between me and many of the people I know is that when I come across something that I don’t think I should be doing, I make it my mission not to do it. Because that, the willingness to change for the better when you’re wrong, is what’s characteristic of good people.

When all’s said and done, and your life is nearing its end, how will you be remembered? Will you be remembered as a good person? (Will you be remembered at all?) I am not a religious person. I believe that when I die, that’s the end for me. My body will be put in a box and then my ashes will be put in an urn. But I don’t want that to be the end! I want to be remembered well. I want the people with whom I cross paths in my life to think fondly of me. For me, if I can’t do something great in the world, I want at least to do as much good as I can. And I can’t imagine why anyone would want anything less. It’s not going to work out in every case. There are people whom I’ve wronged who will never forgive me. That’s OK. You can’t spend your time worrying about people who don’t have time for you. You can only do what you can to do better in the future.
