---
date: 2019-08-27
description: Sometimes a phrase sounds nice but it's meaningless. Other times it sounds nice but it means something bad. We should think hard about our catch-phrases.
tags:
  - post
title: Reflecting on Nice Phrases
---

## Pith and Pin

Every now and again, you see a phrase that seems to capture a lot. It's a clever phrase, it's deep, it's meaningful, and it fits easily into a tweet. It's so good. It's perfect. It captures all you want it to capture. I found something like this when an old colleague said to me, "Rich, don't let the Perfect be the enemy of the Good." I ran with it. I rolled with it. I loved it. I repeated it to my students. I wrote it on my blog. I used it whenever it was even half-way applicable. It wasn't until some years later that I started adding an addendum to it. "Don't let the Perfect be the enemy of the Good. But also don't let the merely Adequate be a substitute for the Right." See, not letting the Perfect be the enemy of the Good means you oughtn't continue to strive for the maximum/optimal result when you've already got something good enough in front of you. It might as well be the Satisficing Consequentialist's mantra.

Consequentialist theories are theories according to which the evaluation of some thing -- an action, say -- depends on the consequences of that thing. So, whether something is good or bad, right or wrong, depends on how it turns out. So, a lot of consequentialists (people who advocate consequentialist theories), claim that if the consequences are what matters, then the rational thing to do is to seek the maximally optimal consequence. Suppose you're at an ice cream shop and all of the flavors are available. You like chocolate and vanilla well enough, but your favorite is the butter pecan. According to a maximizing consequentialist (again, someone who thinks since the consequences are all that matters) you should choose the option that maximizes the good consequences, you should get the butter pecan, even though you'd be perfectly satisfied with chocolate or vanilla.

But just because you think the consequences are all that matters (or are what matters most), doesn't mean you *have* to be a maximizing consequentialist. You could also be a Satisficing Consequentialist. Satisficers think that there are a range of options that are all rationally acceptable, even though some of them might not maximize the good consequences. Basically, it's perfectly rational to select an option, to pursue some consequence, that merely satisfies some minimal threshold of good consequences. So even though butter pecan ice cream is your favorite, there's nothing wrong or problematic or irrational about getting a vanilla instead of butter pecan, even though butter pecan is available and there's nothing stopping you from getting it.

The trouble with "Don't let the Perfect be the enemey of the Good" is that it's super vague with regard to what counts as good enough to warrant not continuing to strive for perfection. So, when I add on "But also don't let the merely Adequate be a substitute for the Right," I'm trying to make clear, to highlight, that Good and Right are different things. A thing can be Good without being Right. And the Right thing might not always be as good as some other option. And as I see it, it's more important to do what's Right than to do something Good, because, depending on what makes a thing Good, a Good thing can be Wrong. For example, some folks think that ultimately, anything that's Good is Good because of the fact that it somehow promotes or produces pleasure. But there are lots of things that promote or produce pleasure that shouldn't be done. All sorts of things that promote or produce pleasure (and so, Good) are things we shouldn't do -- many of us are familiar with jokes that have made us laugh, but on reflection, we realize they're actually horribly Wrong. People have built entire careers on such jokes (see Rodney Dangerfield's catalogue of jokes about his wife, or that one Patton Oswalt bit that I won't name because it's so vile it makes me want to spit). Of course, maybe these cases merely indicate that pleasure isn't related to Good in the way suggested, but you we can imagine that whatever the thing is that is related to Good in the appropriate ways would be similarly problematic.

All this is to say that just becuase it sounds good doesn't mean it is. When it sounds good, we need to reflect on it to see whether it really is. I'm guilty of failing to reflect in this way, just as many folks are. Recently, I've seen another such phrase float around Twitter. And it's a bit tricky, because I have a great deal of admiration for the person who I first saw use this phrase. I don't want to diminish them or what they're trying to say in any way by examining the phrase. At the same time, the philosopher in my bones can't not think about it, examine it, try to break it to see if it really holds up. I think it's particularly important to take the time to reflect on these sorts of things when they start to gain traction among lots of people -- when they take on a sort of memetic status.

[...]

As I sat down to write this post, I thought I would carry on and talk about this particular phrase. But now that I've arrived at the place where that talking is supposed to be, I've realized I don't quite have the courage to do that -- or perhaps I've realized that wanting to isn't sufficient reason for doing so. Either way. Situations are still very fresh, wounds very raw. I'm not sure it would be appropriate to do that just now. I'm not sure there's any way for me to phrase things, knowing myself and the way I tend to write, that won't seem like I'm having a massive go at this particular person. And I very, very, very much don't want to do that. So, I'm going to hold off, end it here, and consider coming back to this another day.
